---
layout: post
categories: ['posts']
title: 
summary: "What&apos;s your purpose, as a company? Why do you do what you do?"
quote:
  text: "&quot;Extending Drucker&apos;s metaphor, companies who take profit as their purpose are like people who think life is about breathing. They&apos;re missing something.&quot;"
  attr: "Peter M. Senge, The Fifth Discipline"
published: true
---

When I was working from my parents&apos; house, I had a maxim scrawled on my whiteboard&mdash;I think it was &quot;my job is to win hearts and minds&quot;, but I don&apos;t really remember. It doesn&apos;t really matter. It was just one in a long line of mental anchors, things I wanted to keep in the forefront of my thoughts long enough for it to become a natural part of my thinking. Something I wanted to internalise. Upon returning to my desk one day, I saw my father&apos;s handwriting off to one side: &quot;he who dies with the most wins.&quot;

I uncapped a marker and wrote &quot;but is still dead&quot; underneath. I left both there for some time.

I&apos;ve always rejected the idea of money for money&apos;s sake. I think the masturbatory idea that a company&apos;s goal should be to accumulate as much wealth as possible is what destroys companies. I believe Peter Drucker&apos;s maxim that money is like oxygen to a company; you need enough to breathe, but if your goal is to breathe as much as humanly possible, you&apos;re probably doing it wrong.

That doesn&apos;t make you a bad company for pursuing profit. It doesn&apos;t mean that I think you&apos;re an evil corporation if you&apos;re driven by revenue. It just means I don&apos;t really want to work for you. This isn&apos;t an anti-capitalist screed, this is just a statement of personal goals.

Because I don&apos;t measure my success by how much revenue I drive to a company&apos;s coffers. I measure my success by how happy its customers are.

In my baby book (are those a thing? Like, does everyone know what those are? If you don&apos;t, it&apos;s just a book my parents wrote in and recorded landmarks in as I grew up) there&apos;s an entry from when I was a baby (obviously): &quot;Paddy loves to laugh!&quot;

A couple of years later, another entry: &quot;Paddy loves to _make people_ laugh!&quot;

I&apos;ve always loved making people happy. It&apos;s really important to me. Knowing people are happy, and especially knowing people are happy because of me, makes me really happy. And while I need to guard against letting that latter part overshadow the former, I think I could do worse when it comes to life goals.

That&apos;s why my personal hall of heroes, the companies I hold close to my heart, the ones I aspire to be like, are the ones that focus on making people happy. They don&apos;t blog about how to use metrics to drive revenue or engagement, they blog about how to use metrics to create a better experience. They believe that if you build something people love, the money will more or less take care of itself. They don&apos;t run conferences that focus on professional development, they run conferences that [focus on people](/posts/realtimeconfeu). They treat the pursuit of happiness, for their employees and their customers, as the most sacred duty of a company.

I read about conferences and blogs and people who focus on using A/B testing to increase profit 800% or how charging more makes you more money or any number of topics that always seem to end with &quot;and here&apos;s how much more money I made!&quot; and I just get sad. Not because I think these people are _wrong_; they&apos;re usually brilliant people who are amazing at what they do, and what they do offers a very real value to a certain type of people. I am not trying to discredit their practices at all.

But they&apos;re not for me. And as the world seizes the idea that software can make people lots of money very, very quickly, I fear it will be harder and harder to find people like me; people for whom the software and the experiences around it are the goal and the money a means, not the other way around.

I just want to make people happy.
