---
layout: post
categories: ['posts']
title: Child
summary: I&rsquo;m having a bit of an existential crisis. Don&rsquo;t mind me.
published: true
---

I think I&rsquo;ve grown up.

That&rsquo;s such a terrifying, anxiety-inducing sentence for me to put to paper. It feels like an existential threat.

I&rsquo;m having a hard time right now. I don&rsquo;t know why. Well, I know [why](http://paddyforan.getsby.co). But I don&rsquo;t know why this particular moment is hard.

When I was offered my first full-time job, I remember where I was. I remember what I was doing. I remember rushing home and calling a friend to tell him the news. Shaking. Panicking. I was going to have a real adult job and I just needed to hear the voice of somebody I loved. I needed the affirmation that some part of my life still held. That this wasn&rsquo;t the end of everything I knew.

I&rsquo;ve always been a child.

Childhood is a weird thing. It is the antithesis of empathy. It is existing in your own unique, all-encompassing world. Empathy is recognising other people&rsquo;s worlds and respecting them. But to do that, you have to venture outside your own little comfort zone.

It&rsquo;s dangerous to go alone.

I&rsquo;ve been working hard on being more empathetic. I&rsquo;m privileged. It is only fair that I use my privilege to try and make life better for the less privileged.

I still am really bad at it. But I&rsquo;m less bad.

I&rsquo;ve lost that myopia. I&rsquo;m no longer Peter Pan, forgetting about my companions every so often or when something shiny distracts me. I&rsquo;m no longer Dorian Gray, staring at myself all day.

Well, I&rsquo;ve lost _a little_. As this proves, I&rsquo;ve still got plenty of it.

But children are also the ones that ask why, if I&rsquo;m a boy, I have a boyfriend. and I say &ldquo;because I love him.&rdquo; and they say &ldquo;Oh.&rdquo; and that&rsquo;s that.

So sometimes children have more empathy than adults.

Or maybe they care so little for the world outside themselves, they&rsquo;re less invested in what it looks like. The world is simpler, because they aren&rsquo;t looking closely.

Either way, I almost kind of prefer it.

But children also get more wonder out of the world. They want to share everything with you, beaming. Proud.

I remember, distinctly, the feeling of being so excited about what I had made that I couldn&rsquo;t wait to share it. It&rsquo;s like being a balloon that&rsquo;s about to pop. You have to drag the nearest person over and say &ldquo;Look! See what I&rsquo;ve made?&rdquo; and they don&rsquo;t care and you don&rdsquo;t care that _they_ don&rsquo;t care because you&rsquo;re infected with the pride and joy of doing a thing and now someone else knows, so it&rsquo;s real.

I can&rsquo;t tell you the last time I felt that.

And it hurts to admit that because I&rsquo;m paid to do what I love.

And I&rsquo;ve lost the art of it.

I center it around the users because that&rsquo;s important to me. But we&rsquo;ve made it so hard and everything&rsquo;s so much work and I&rsquo;m not sure I&rsquo;m good enough. But all our effort at making things easier goes towards solutions that come at too high a cost because control and power are what corporations deal in now and this is the golden age.

So I don&rsquo;t take the easy way because how I do the thing is now as important as the thing being done which means that euphoria hit is not proportionate to my effort and comes after a long delay.

But only children need immediate gratification.

And I&rsquo;m not a child.

And that&rsquo;s overwhelming.

I&rsquo;m shutting down.

My boyfriend gently reminded me today that he&rsquo;s not my errand boy. Because I keep asking him to go do things for me. Pick something up. Drop something off. Despite the fact that he works on his feet all day and I sit around and push buttons and sleep too much.

I can&rsquo;t find the words to tell him that walking out the front door puts me in contact with a world too big for me. With a world I can&rsquo;t engage with on my own terms. With a world that is just&hellip; too overwhelming right now.

Well, I guess those are the words. Surprise, Ethan. I love you.

Still not his problem. Still not okay.

As much as I hate to admit it, and as much as I hate to even think it, I have the recurring, distressing thought that I grew up when he followed me to Brooklyn. That&rsquo;s a big burden to place on him, and that&rsquo;s unfair. But even if it is the case, it was worth it. I&rsquo;d do the same thing again tomorrow. I hope to do the same thing again soon. And maybe it will push this existential crisis further. Maybe it won&rsquo;t. I don&rsquo;t really care either way.

But children do not have someone and their puppy relying on them. Not in a condescending, heteronormative, gender-roles-reinforcing financial sense. But he is very much my partner. In everything. And you take care of your partner.

But children don&rsquo;t take care of anyone. They&rsquo;re taken care of.

I&rsquo;m still not ready to grow up.

But ready or not, here it comes.
