---
layout: post
categories: ['posts']
title: Here&rsquo;s to the Yetis
summary: A love letter to some of my favourite people on earth.
published: true
img:
  file: yeti.jpg
  attr: julochka
  title: 4/3.2015 - yeti has a little snowboard time
  link: https://flic.kr/p/r3LbrH
---

It&rsquo;s been a little while since I last posted, and I kind of want to get in the habit of posting more. (How will you know I&rsquo;m alive if I&rsquo;m not constantly sharing my opinions?) 

Also, today was kind of shitty, and [a lot of my posts tend to be about things that make me sad](/posts/negative), so I figure it&rsquo;s about time I just talked about something I love without really having a point. Or having several points. I don&rsquo;t know.

If you know me, you know where this is going: [&amp;yet](https://andyet.com).

I believe I have the proud distinction of being &amp;yet&rsquo;s first fanboy. I don&rsquo;t remember how it happened or when it started. I remember bumping into them, sort-of-kind-of-maybe, when I was investigating NodeJS. I picked that ball up and ran with it for a very short time, but never got very far. And yet (ha!), &amp;yet remained in my life. From the excellent poem on their website, to the brand they&rsquo;ve created, to the culture they promote.

&amp;yet is not my favourite company. &amp;yet is my favourite group of people _that just so happen_ to [build cool things](https://talky.io) together. And get paid to make stuff. I think what I&rsquo;m trying to get across is that, yes, they&rsquo;re a company, but I don&rsquo;t love them for the things they do as a company. I love them for the people they are. If &amp;yet got bought today and replaced with entirely new people, even if the products stayed exactly the same, I wouldn&rsquo;t love &amp;yet anymore. I&rsquo;d still just love those people. Which is not to say I don&rsquo;t love new people who join the company; I totally do. &amp;yet has had many and varied employees for differing amount of times, and as soon as I become aware of them, I universally end up loving them. But I don&rsquo;t love them because they&rsquo;re &amp;yetis. &amp;yet just happens to hire the kind of people I love.

It&rsquo;s kind of hard to explain how I relate to these people. Of course they&rsquo;re my heroes, but&hellip; that seems too distant, impersonal. I have an &amp;yet hoodie, that I got by simply asking for it. I treasure it. I [got to meet Adam](/posts/realtimeconfeu) and deliver a hug from the team to him. When I was in Philadelphia for training, I met up with [Bear](http://bear.im), who gave me a hug. For each person on the team, by name, that heard we were meeting up and wanted to pass on a hug. We stood outside a bar embracing, stepping back, embracing, stepping back, over and over for at least five minutes. I got to meet up with [Henrik](http://henrikjoreteg.com) in Chicago because we happened to be in the same city at the same time and he kindly waited to meet up with me, see a giant bean, and chat about HTML5 and JavaScript, even though _I have no idea what I&rsquo;m talking about_. I got to meet up with [Amy](https://twitter.com/amydearest) and chat over bagels.

And now they have [an entire community](https://andyet.com/andyou) of similarly wonderful people.

And I love them all dearly.

Sometimes it&rsquo;s hard to explain, because I don&rsquo;t stop loving people when they leave &amp;yet, and sometimes I use &ldquo;&amp;yeti&rdquo; to refer to people that don&rsquo;t even _work_ for &amp;yet and never have, but who I know exclusively through &amp;yet. &amp;yet isn&rsquo;t a company, to me; it&rsquo;s just a casual shorthand for &ldquo;good, loving, compassionate, intentional people&rdquo;. There is an entire group of people on Twitter that I can&rsquo;t tell if they work for &amp;yet or worked for &amp;yet or just are always talking to &amp;yet, but they&rsquo;re decidedly my friends.

In many ways, &amp;yet is what I think of when I say &ldquo;[we can do better](/posts/better)&rdquo;.

I [claimed](https://twitter.com/paddyforan/status/586292905704325120) today that you can tell how my day went based on how I react to &amp;yet. Sometimes, it&rsquo;s a pick-me-up to remember that a group of people like that can exist and work together. Sometimes, it&rsquo;s a warm fuzzy feeling of remembering that people I respect and like _like me, too_. Sometimes, it makes me sad and despondent, because the vibe of positivity and creativity and trying to do better is so far removed from my own reality that day.

But I&rsquo;m always happy to have &amp;yet in my life. So here&rsquo;s to the yetis.
